feat: Adding a tutorial for deploying UPF in DPDK mode (#12)
canonical/charmed-aether-sd-core: docs/tutorials/using_dpdk.md

> # Using DPDK

Reviewer: Maybe instead call this

# Accelerated Networking

Using DPDK just seems to vague

Author: Yes, I like your suggestion.

Author: Done

In this tutorial, we will deploy User Plane Function (UPF) in DPDK mode using the [sdcore-user-plane-k8s] Terraform Module in a VM.
[Multipass] is used to create User plane VM with a [LXD] backend.

## Requirements

A machine running Ubuntu 22.04 with the following resources:

- At least one NIC with internet access
- CPU that supports AVX2, RDRAND and PDPE1GB instructions (Intel Haswell, AMD Excavator or equivalent)
- 8 cores
- 16 GB RAM
- 50 GiB disk

## 1. Prepare the Host machine

### Enable HugePages

> As a `root` user, update the Grub to enable 2 * 1Gi HugePages in the host machine. Then, the host is gracefully rebooted to activate the settings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a `root` user, update Grub to enable 2 * 1Gi HugePages in the host machine. This is followed by a gracefully reboot to activate the settings.
```

Author: Changed. Thanks.

```shell
sudo sed -i "s/GRUB_CMDLINE_LINUX=.*/GRUB_CMDLINE_LINUX='default_hugepagesz=1G hugepages=2'/" /etc/default/grub
sudo update-grub
sudo init 6
```

#### Checkpoint 1: Are HugePages enabled ?

You should be able to see the 2 * Free Hugepages with 1048576 kB size by executing the following command:

```shell
cat /proc/meminfo | grep Huge
```

The output should be similar to the following:

```console
AnonHugePages:         0 kB
ShmemHugePages:        0 kB
FileHugePages:         0 kB
HugePages_Total:       2
HugePages_Free:        2
HugePages_Rsvd:        0
HugePages_Surp:        0
Hugepagesize:    1048576 kB
Hugetlb:         2097152 kB
```

### Networks

The following IP networks will be used for User Plane function deployment:

| Name         | Subnet        | Gateway IP |
|--------------|---------------|------------|
| `management` | 10.201.0.0/24 | 10.201.0.1 |
| `access`     | 10.202.0.0/24 | 10.202.0.1 |
| `core`       | 10.203.0.0/24 | 10.203.0.1 |
| `ran`        | 10.204.0.0/24 | 10.204.0.1 |

> On the host machine, create local network bridges to be used by LXD by adding below configuration under `/etc/netplan/99-sdcore-networks.yaml`.

Reviewer: I'm not sure this howto should cover the creation of the network interfaces. Perhaps this should be its own howto?

Reviewer: Whoops, sorry, I thought I was reading the howto PR, not the tutorial. Ignore this comment.

```shell
sudo chmod 600 /etc/netplan/99-sdcore-networks.yaml
sudo netplan apply
```

```{note}
Applying new netplan configuration may produce warnings related to file permissions being too open. 
You may safely disregard them.
```

```{note}
`ran-br` bridge is only used to create a route from `access` to `ran` network in User Plane Function.
```

### Install and Configure LXD

Install LXD:

```console
sudo snap install lxd
```

Initialize LXD:

```console
lxd init --auto
```

### Install and configure Multipass

Install Multipass:

```console
sudo snap install multipass
```

Set LXD as local driver:

```console
multipass set local.driver=lxd
```

Connect Multipass to LXD:

```console
sudo snap connect multipass:lxd lxd
```

## 2. Create a Virtual Machine

To complete this tutorial, you will need one virtual machine with access to the networks as follows:

| Machine                              | CPUs | RAM | Disk | Networks                       |
|--------------------------------------|------|-----|------|--------------------------------|
| User Plane Kubernetes Cluster        | 4    | 12g | 20g  | `management`, `access`, `core` |

Create VM with Multipass:

```console

> multipass launch -c 4 -m 12G -d 20G -n user-plane  --network mgmt-br --network core-br --network access-br jammy

Reviewer: We reserved the huge pages on the host, but we are not launching the VM using those huge pages. Looking at the multipass documentation, I cannot see a method of launching the VM to use that huge page. If MP cannot, then we should remove the huge page configuration from the host machine configuration as it is locking the 2G RAM that nothing can use.

Reviewer: I just did a check on my laptop. No huge pages configured
```
mark@mark-laptop:~$ grep Huge /proc/meminfo
AnonHugePages:         0 kB
ShmemHugePages:   831488 kB
FileHugePages:         0 kB
HugePages_Total:       0
HugePages_Free:        0
HugePages_Rsvd:        0
HugePages_Surp:        0
Hugepagesize:       2048 kB
Hugetlb:               0 kB
```

Launched a MP vm, added 1g huge pages to grub, and it has huge pages after reboot
```
ubuntu@user-plane:~$ grep Huge /proc/meminfo 
AnonHugePages:         0 kB
ShmemHugePages:        0 kB
FileHugePages:         0 kB
HugePages_Total:       2
HugePages_Free:        2
HugePages_Rsvd:        0
HugePages_Surp:        0
Hugepagesize:    1048576 kB
Hugetlb:         2097152 kB
```

So it is very unlikely that multipass is actually using the host.

Author: I tested it again and you are right. Enabling hugepages in the host part is unnecessary. This part is removed.

```shell
AnonHugePages:         0 kB
ShmemHugePages:        0 kB
FileHugePages:         0 kB
HugePages_Total:       2
HugePages_Free:        2
HugePages_Rsvd:        0
HugePages_Surp:        0
Hugepagesize:    1048576 kB
Hugetlb:         2097152 kB
```

### Configure IP addresses in the User Plane VM

Configure IP addresses for `mgmt`, `core` and `access` interfaces and add route from `access` to `ran` network by replacing the content of `/etc/netplan/50-cloud-init.yaml`:

```shell
cat << EOF | sudo tee /etc/netplan/50-cloud-init.yaml
network:
    ethernets:
        enp5s0:
            dhcp4: true
        enp6s0:
            dhcp4: false
            addresses:
              - 10.201.0.102/24
            optional: true
        enp7s0:
            dhcp4: false
            addresses:
              - 10.203.0.100/24
            optional: true
        enp8s0:
            dhcp4: false
            addresses:
              - 10.202.0.100/24
            routes:
              - to: 10.204.0.0/24
                via: 10.202.0.1
            optional: true
    version: 2
EOF
```

Apply the network configuration:

```shell
sudo chmod 600 /etc/netplan/50-cloud-init.yaml
sudo netplan apply
```

> ### Create the MACVLAN bridges for `enp7s0` and `enp8s0`

Reviewer: This is not needed. When we unbind using `driverctl`, these interfaces go away. The `diverctl` and `enable_unsafe_noiommu_mode` could perhaps be put instead into `/etc/rc.local`

Author: Create the MACVLAN bridges part is removed and other configurations are persisted using `/etc/rc.local`.

Author: Done
